Common rules for inclusion and querying (#210)
Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe: optimade.rst

The use of :val:`null` values inside nested property values (such as, e.g., lists or dictionaries) are described in the definitions of those data structures elsewhere in the specification, see section `Entry List`_.
For these properties, :val:`null` MAY carry a special meaning.

> Responses that include entries where REQUIRED properties have an unknown value MUST include these properties with the value :val:`null`.

Reviewer: I've edited into:
> REQUIRED properties with an unknown value MUST be included and returned in the response with the value :val:`null`.

> Responses to requests where OPTIONAL properties have been explicitly requested via the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter, and which include entries where those properties have an unknown value, MUST include these properties with the value :val:`null`.

Reviewer 2: This may then also be rewritten.
```suggestion
OPTIONAL properties, if requested explicitly via the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter, MUST be included and returned in the response.
```

Reviewer: Your version misses "with an unknown value". Sure, arguably you can say that the statement applies generally--- unknown value or not, but the point of this section is to clarify that these properties need to be in the response even if the value is unknown.

Reviewer: I've edited into:
> OPTIONAL properties with an unknown value, if requested explicitly via the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter, MUST be included and returned in the response with the value :val:`null`.

(For more info on the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter, see section `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_.)

> The interaction of properties with an unknown value with query filters is described in the section `Filtering on Properties with unknown value`_.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the title for this section either have plural `values` or an `a` before unknown?

Reviewer: To the best of my language abilities, I think both are valid grammatically. I assume you want us to change it, so I'll do that.

The use of :val:`null` values inside nested property values (such as, e.g., lists or dictionaries) are described in the definitions of those data structures elsewhere in the specification, see section `Entry List`_.
For these properties, :val:`null` MAY carry a special meaning.

Responses that include entries where REQUIRED properties have an unknown value MUST include these properties with the value :val:`null`.

> Responses to requests where OPTIONAL properties have been explicitly requested via the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter, and which includes entries where those properties have an unknown value, MUST include these properties with the value :val:`null`.

Author: "which includes" -> "which include"

Reviewer: Thanks! 

I'm doing these fixes and will push them to your repo now, but you do realize this is your PR, so nothing prevents you from doing the edits :-)

Entry listing endpoints return a list of resource objects representing entries of a specific type.
For example, a list of structures, or a list of calculations.

> For each entry in the list, a set of properties and their corresponding values are given on the form dictated by the output format.

Author: Shouldn't is be "are given on the form" -> "are given based on the form"?

Author: I must admit I don't fully understand this sentence. I think the set of properties is independent on the output format, so are the values. Or am I missing something?

Reviewer: The "form" part of the sentence was just to clarify that how things are encoded in the response is dependent on the output format. However, I think you are right that this clarification confuses more than it helps, so how about just skipping it:

> Each entry in the list includes a set of properties and their corresponding values.
> The section `Entry list`_ specifies properties as belonging to one of three categories:

Author: I agree with @rartino's suggestion.

Specific standard entry types are specified in section `Entry list`_.
The API implementation MAY provide other entry types than the ones standardized in this specification, but such entry types MUST be prefixed by a database-provider-specific prefix.

> Only the properties that are marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be present in the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only the properties marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be present in the response.
```

> The query parameter *response_fields* is used by the client to request OPTIONAL properties to be included in the response, see Section `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is used by the client to request OPTIONAL properties to be included in the response, see Section `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_.
```

Specific standard entry types are specified in section `Entry list`_.
The API implementation MAY provide other entry types than the ones standardized in this specification, but such entry types MUST be prefixed by a database-provider-specific prefix.

> By default, only those properties MUST be present in entry descriptions that are marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_.

Reviewer 2: Rearranging for easy readability.
```suggestion
By default, only those properties that are marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be present in entry descriptions.
```

Reviewer 2: By the way, isn't this specific to the `/info/<entry_endpoint>` endpoints? That's the only place we return entry property `description`s.

Author: Thanks for spotting this. By *entry description* I meant *response*. Fixed the term in c69d5f0eb137690ceb2d3993ff0f443410d9b2f4, as well as accepted your rearranging.

> Query parameter *response_fields* MAY be used to explicitly include or exclude properties.

Reviewer: If you follow my suggestion with editing the text about `response_fields`, this needs to be edited
```suggestion
The query parameter *response_fields* is used by the client to request OPTIONAL properties to be included in the response, see Section `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_.
```
And the line above should probably drop "By default,"

Entry listing endpoints return a list of resource objects representing entries of a specific type.
For example, a list of structures, or a list of calculations.

Each entry in the list includes a set of properties and their corresponding values.
The section `Entry list`_ specifies properties as belonging to one of three categories:

> 1. Some properties are marked as REQUIRED in the response. These properties MUST always be present for all entries in the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Some properties are marked as REQUIRED in the response.
   These properties MUST always be present for all entries in the response.
```

> 2. Properties marked as part of the "default response" MUST be included if the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not part of the request, or if they are explicity requested in :query-param:`response_fields`. Otherwise they MUST NOT be included.

Reviewer 2: Is `"default response"` defined somewhere?

Reviewer: It is just meant to quote the human-friendly explanation "label" used in that section to mark these. I'll try to rephrase.

Reviewer: Ok, I've edited all text that references "default response", because I completely agree that this moniker was not very clear; I now specify the formal definition first, and then clarify that this can be seen as the default value of the `response_fileds` query parameter. Check the new version and let me know if it is not sufficient.

Reviewer 2: Thanks - will make another review now. Note, I was also okay with defining this term under our beginning definitions.

> 2. Properties marked as part of the "default response" MUST be included if the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not part of the request, or if they are explicity requested in :query-param:`response_fields`. Otherwise they MUST NOT be included.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Properties marked as part of the "default response" MUST be included if the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not part of the request, or if they are explicity requested in :query-param:`response_fields`.
   Otherwise they MUST NOT be included.
```

> 3. Properties that are neither REQUIRED, nor part of the "default response" MUST be included if explicity requested in the :query-param:`response_fields`. Otherwise they SHOULD NOT be included.

Reviewer 2: New line & addition of "query parameter" to the first sentence.
```suggestion
3. Properties that are neither REQUIRED, nor part of the "default response" MUST be included if explicity requested in the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`.
   Otherwise they SHOULD NOT be included.
```

> Examples of entry listing endpoints:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples of valid entry listing endpoint URLs:
```

Entry listing endpoints return a list of resource objects representing entries of a specific type.
For example, a list of structures, or a list of calculations.

Each entry in the list includes a set of properties and their corresponding values.
The section `Entry list`_ specifies properties as belonging to one of three categories:

> 1. Some properties are marked as REQUIRED in the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Properties marked as REQUIRED in the response.
```

   These properties MUST always be present for all entries in the response.

> 2. Some properties are marked as REQUIRED only if the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not part of the request, or if they are explicity requested in :query-param:`response_fields`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Properties marked as REQUIRED only if the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not part of the request, or if they are explicitly requested in :query-param:`response_fields`.
```

>    Otherwise they MUST NOT be included. One can think of these properties as consituting a default value for :query-param:`response_fields` when that parameter is omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Otherwise they MUST NOT be included.
   One can think of these properties as consituting a default value for :query-param:`response_fields` when that parameter is omitted.
```

> 3. Properties that are not marked as REQUIRED in any case, MUST be included only if explicity requested in the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Properties not marked as REQUIRED in any case, MUST be included only if explicitly requested in the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`.
```

   Otherwise they SHOULD NOT be included.

> Examples of valid entry listing endpoints URLs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples of valid entry listing endpoint URLs:
```

  The email SHOULD be that of a person and not an automatic system.
  Example: http://example.com/optimade/v0.9/structures?email_address=user@example.com
- **response\_fields**: a comma-delimited set of fields to be provided in the output.

>   If provided, these fields MUST be returned along the REQUIRED fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If provided, these fields MUST be returned along with the REQUIRED fields.
```

  No other OPTIONAL fields MUST be returned in such case.

>   Example: http://example.com/optimade/v0.9/structures?response_fields=url,nsites

Reviewer 2: We don't have a `url` field.
```suggestion
  Example: http://example.com/optimade/v0.9/structures?response_fields=last_modified,nsites
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I guess passing a REQUIRED field to `response_fields` is still fine? Although it is understood that it will not alter the response?

Author: > We don't have a `url` field.

Indeed, it's better to use a real-world example.

> Also, I guess passing a REQUIRED field to `response_fields` is still fine? Although it is understood that it will not alter the response?

Yes and yes.

  The email SHOULD be that of a person and not an automatic system.
  Example: http://example.com/optimade/v0.9/structures?email_address=user@example.com
- **response\_fields**: a comma-delimited set of fields to be provided in the output.
  If provided, these fields MUST be returned along with the REQUIRED fields.

>   No other OPTIONAL fields MUST be returned in such case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Other OPTIONAL fields MUST NOT be returned in such case.
```

API <https://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#fetching-filtering>`__.
The filter expression allows desired properties to be compared against search values; several such comparisons can be combined using the logical conjunctions AND, OR, NOT, and parentheses, with their usual semantics.

> Only those properties MUST be queryable that are marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_. Query support for other properties is OPTIONAL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only those properties marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be queryable.
Query support for other properties is OPTIONAL.
```

API <https://jsonapi.org/format/1.0/#fetching-filtering>`__.
The filter expression allows desired properties to be compared against search values; several such comparisons can be combined using the logical conjunctions AND, OR, NOT, and parentheses, with their usual semantics.

> All properties marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be queryable with all mandatory filter featrues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All properties marked as REQUIRED in section `Entry list`_ MUST be queryable with all mandatory filter features.
```

- **Type**: string.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be :val:`null` for any entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be of type `unknown value`, i.e., :val:`null`.
```

Reviewer 2: My first suggested change was to simply remove ` for any entries`, which is my strongest suggested change in this sentence. The other part is not as crucial for me.

Reviewer: I'm opposed to an explicit statement that says that `unknown value` is a type, because in my understanding "unknown" is more complicated than that.

But, so why do you feel strongly for removing "for any entries"? To me, this makes it clear with zero ambiguity that the implementation cannot serve any entries where these are null. You may argue that this should be inferred even without that clarification, but I really think it helps to communicate the intent of this limitation clearly.

Reviewer: Actually, upon editing, I decide to fold on this. I'll cut the "for any entries", it should be obvious. I'll skip the additional reference to unknown here, unless you can motivate why.

Reviewer 2: > it should be obvious.

Thanks :+1: 

> I'll skip the additional reference to unknown here, unless you can motivate why.

The reason was simply that we _have_ defined `unknown value` as a recognized type in our specification already, which MAY have the value `null`, and MUST have the value `null` for a JSON response.
See [this section](https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe/blob/develop/optimade.rst#21data-types) and specifically [this line](https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe/blame/develop/optimade.rst#L209). However! In the very next line, we do explicitly write that we will consider this type to always have value `null`, so no reason to underline this fact again in the current part of the spec.
I give :) I think we intentionally wrote [this line](https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe/blame/develop/optimade.rst#L210) to be able to do exactly what we are currently doing here, i.e., use `null` as a universal value for a property with one or more unknown values.

- **Type**: string.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be :val:`null` for any entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be :val:`null`.
```

Reviewer 2: This is essentially my original suggested change to this line - see previous suggested change for an additional change.

- **Type**: Decided by the API implementation.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  
  - **Support**: Support for database-provider-specific properties is fully OPTIONAL.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL. If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported.

>   - **Response**: API implementations are free to choose whether database-provider-specific properties are only included when requested using the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`, or if they are regarded as part of the "deault response", i.e., also included when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not present. Implementations SHOULD NOT include database-provider-specific properties when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is present but does not list them.

Author: "deault response" -> "default response"

- **Type**: string.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null` for all entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
```

- **Type**: Decided by the API implementation.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  
  - **Support**: Support for database-provider-specific properties is fully OPTIONAL.

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL. If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL.
     If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported.
```

>   - **Response**: API implementations are free to choose whether database-provider-specific properties are only included when requested using the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`, or if they are regarded as part of the "default response", i.e., also included when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not present. Implementations SHOULD NOT include database-provider-specific properties when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is present but does not list them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Response**: API implementations are free to choose whether database-provider-specific properties are only included when requested using the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`, or if they are regarded as part of the "default response", i.e., also included when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is not present.
    Implementations SHOULD NOT include database-provider-specific properties when the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields` is present but does not list them.
```

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   

Reviewer 2: For all OPTIONAL properties, is the queryability always stated as "If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported"? If not, I guess we should keep this, if yes, then it's definitely fine to leave it out, writing this sentence as generality elsewhere.

Author: Good point. Clarified this in 502bd44296a69e799f4abdf55b8305bc621ad223.

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   

Author: Added a general statement about the optionally supported operators in 502bd44296a69e799f4abdf55b8305bc621ad223.

- **Type**: list of list of floats.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   - **Response**: REQUIRED in the response.

Reviewer 2: I presume it is intentional to leave out the conditional here?

Author: Yes. The intent was to simplify the rules for inclusion/exclusion of properties. Also I had PR #206 in mind while developing the current PR.

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., may be :val:`null` for all entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
```

- **Type**: list of list of floats.
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: SHOULD be supported by all implementations, i.e., SHOULD NOT be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: There is some inconsistency in when there is an empty line here or not.

    
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

>   - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., may be :val:`null` for all entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
```

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.
    If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.
```

- **Requirements/Conventions for properties in database-provider-specific entry types**:
  

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL.

Reviewer 2: You've deleted this for some that are OPTIONAL in the response, but not all. How do you justify this? Or rather, what is the implication?

Author: You are right. I was a little hesitant to cleanup the requirements, but I think with the addition of general clarification in 502bd44296a69e799f4abdf55b8305bc621ad223 the rest of the optional clauses can be removed. Did so in 8a6a4b2c9e826b43505847f47d7544239c2a45d8 and 892f60a55dd615e20ad17ba6a9dc6d2e518049ce.

- **Type**: list of strings
- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be :val:`null` for any entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: MUST be supported by all implementations, MUST NOT be :val:`null`.
```

- **Requirements/Conventions**:
  

>   - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., any of the properties may be :val:`null` for all entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., any of the properties MAY be :val:`null`.
```

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on any of these properties is OPTIONAL. If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Query**: Support for queries on any of these properties is OPTIONAL.
    If supported, filters MAY support only a subset of comparison operators.
```

Database-Provider-Specific Entry Types
--------------------------------------

Names of database-provider-specific entry types MUST start with database-provider-specific namespace prefix (see appendix `Database-Provider-Specific Namespace Prefixes`_).
Database-provider-specific entry types MUST have all properties described above in section `Properties Used by Multiple Entry Types`_.

* **Requirements/Conventions for properties in database-provider-specific entry types**:

  - **Support**: Support for any properties in database-provider-specific entry types is fully OPTIONAL.

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL. If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Query**: Support for queries on these properties are OPTIONAL.
    If supported, only a subset of filter operators MAY be supported.
```

Database-Provider-Specific Entry Types
--------------------------------------

Names of database-provider-specific entry types MUST start with database-provider-specific namespace prefix (see appendix `Database-Provider-Specific Namespace Prefixes`_).
Database-provider-specific entry types MUST have all properties described above in section `Properties Used by Multiple Entry Types`_.

> * **Requirements/Conventions for properties in database-provider-specific entry types**:

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason this bullet point has changed from `-` to `*`? Just curious. If it looks better, that's fine. If it looks the same, then maybe change it back to be consistent within the document.

Reviewer: No idea how this happened. Good catch!
